xx
---
title: "Programming Models"
author: Brad Windsor <bwindsor22@gmail.com>
---
# Introduction
The papers this week cover 3 general topics:
* Weld -- End-to-End Optimization for Data Analytics
* Naiad -- A Timely Dataflow System
* Noria -- Dynamic, partially-stateful data-flow 

# Weld
https://cs.nyu.edu/~apanda/classes/sp21/papers/weld.pdf

## Introduction
Weld is a library that is a common runtime for data analytics libraries like numpy and panda that leads to performance improvements.

## Motivation
When a user executes a query on a DBMS, she can expect that the query will go through end-to-end optimization and execution. Yet when she works in Python, there might be several stages of data transfer between pandas, numpy, etc. This means that intermediate libraries get optimized while no end-to-end optimization takes place.

## Approaches

Weld lets libraries express their computations in an intermediate representation (IR), then maps that representation to the most effective machine code.

The IR is based on monad comprehensions, and is purely functional, meaning all variables are immutable. The data types are scalars, vectors, and dicts, with some builders and merger functions. Execution is lazy.

Weld works by defining WeldObject's in the python code which have operations done to them. The Weld optimizer then runs through the resulting operations and performs several optimizations, for instance by finding two map operations and performing them as one operation.

## Trade-Offs
Weld requires work for the developer; instead of using a numpy array, she must work with a weld array. It also requires significant upkeep from the weld team; new features in Pandas may not automattically be supported by weld. Finally although weld can work across libraries, it may not have the full optimization potential that's possible within a data processing framework: although weld might simplify some maps/reduces, it wouldn't be able to cache an index as in SQL (a software-specific optimization).

Despite all this, weld routinely sees runtime speedups of 5-10x, and is a good solution for the cross-library optimization problem.

## Open Questions and Future Work
One immediate concern is that when visiting weld's website, weld.rs, we can see that it's end of life. A one-size-fits-all runtime seems too much to maintain indefinitely.  A more manageable approach might be optimiztions within pairs of libraries; can tensorflow and numpy developers get together and make things easier for the python optimizer to make the same improvements that weld's was. Another is the growth of frameworks; tensorflow has a dataset object that does much of what pandas does, reducing the need for cross-library applications.

# Naiad: A Timely Dataflow System 
https://cs.nyu.edu/~apanda/classes/sp21/papers/naiad.pdf

## Introduction
Naiad is a distributed system for executing dataflow programs. It is a framework upon which other programs can be written, e.g. to implement pagerank or another algorithm.

## Motivation
Naiad combines the functionality of three other types of systems: batch processing systems which have high throughput, stream-processors which have low latency, and trigger-based approaches that don't guarantee consistency.  Naiad aims to match the functionality of all of these, including loops in the data flow and stateful data.

An example system might be one which holds several million tweets in-memory, is constantly consuming new tweets, while also servic

## Approaches
Naiad is a dataflow graph with input verticies and output verticies. The programmer writes each vertex as an implementation of the vertex interface. The vertex may have various functions like onRecv, onNotify, sendBy, etc that communicate with other nodes. Messages are timestamped which helps prevent their flowing back in time.

Code written with Naiad describes a virtual graph; this is mapped to a physical graph for its implementation. A group of processes becomes a group of workers that hold a set of verticies, and workers can exchange messages either through TCP or through shared memory. Workers have shared queues and no other shared state, so the verticies are the main holders of state.

The authors show a number of advanced applications built with Naiad, including batch iterative graph computation, batch iterative machine learning, streaming acyclic computation (a k-exposure metric for finding contraversial tweets) and others.

## Tradeoffs 
One downside of Naiad looks like Microsoft ecosystem lock-in; it's written in C#, tested with VopalWabbit, and one would expect set up on Azure. Another might be complexity; the 22,700 lines of C# code might be able to achive many things, though it might be unnecessary for a simple batch job. Still, one can imagine that building one system with Naiad would be enough to learn, or that if one built a batch application with Naiad and wanted to add streaming later, the extensibility would be easy to do. 


# Noria: partially-stateful data-flow
https://cs.nyu.edu/~apanda/classes/sp21/papers/noria.pdf 

## Introduction
Noria is a data-flow application which allows the faster computation of results for web application.

## Motivation
The authors give the example of lobste.rs, a site which aggregates stories and votes. The votes coming in from users must be reflected in many different places, such that one update must perpetuate down many timelines. 

Noria addresses the problem where if every new piece of data were perpetuated to every downstream state and computation, the space and computation needs would become prohibitively expensive.

## Approaches
Noria's approach is similar to maintaining many views in a SQL database, where the most common views are updated after each reference and the less common views are eventually dropped and replaced with newer ones. 

When a query requires that new state be constructed, the new state is calculated with an upquery to previous state

This is an instance of a multi-query optimization problem; Norial looks at how to use existing expressions to more quickly evaluate new ones.

Noria is written in rust with RocksDB.

## Tradeoffs 
There are some incomplete aspects of Noria’s design; it doesn’t support all SQL keywords, eviction from state is random, and consistency is only guaranteed in eventuality. 

A large competitor to Noria might be Redis; although Redis is just a cache, the idea of caching frequently used results fulfills much of Noria's purpose. 



