---
title: "Storage: Privacy and Policies"
author: Sriram Ramesh <sr5824@nyu.edu>
---
# Introduction
Storage of data in public cloud providers has raised a privacy concern among 
consumers and users. Re-designing the existing cloud infrastructure to preserve 
privacy has its own challenges and performance limitations.


# Motivation
Many companies have been collecting data from its users since the boom of 
internet which later laid the first step for targeted online advertising.
Some Companies release these datasets to public for improving their product.
In 2009, Netflix released movie preferences of 480,000 subscribers for
improving their movie recommendation system. This was the largest voluntary
privacy breach leading to a law suit[1]. Since then, we have witnessed Cambridge
Analytica and recently Google photos sending private data to strangers[2].
This led to the birth of GDPR[3] and regulations from multiple governments[4,5].
Thus, new storage systems or improvements in existing storage was required which 
were performant and scaling without compromising the privacy of users.

Now, we look at the problems focussed by paper to fulfill user privacy
1. Obladi - Hiding Access Pattern of the data in a key-value store.
Why Access pattern is important?
- Travel websites increase price of a ticket based on frequency of search to a destination
- Patients Cancer stage can be predicted by the frequency of accessing the clients medical records

2. GDPR and Storage Systems - Improving existing systems to make them GDPR-compliant.
How existing databases like PostgreSQL and redis perform after making them 
GDPR-compliant? 
3. Differential Privacy: A Survey of Results - Privacy preserving data analysis
Is it possible to release statistic information of people without compromising 
the privacy of individuals.

# Approaches and Limitations

## Obladi:

- Provide ACID transactions with hidden access pattern
- Epoch based commits for faster oblivious storage
- 5x to 12x compared to non-oblivious baseline
- Leverages the waiting time to commit transactions to a trusted proxy to improve performance and assure privacy.
- Read Operations proceed without blocking while writes are delayedsimilar to multi-versioned database. 
  *Delayed visibility* helps in: 
    1. Multiversioned db atop a single-versioned ORAM Read Operations proceed
       without blocking while writes are delayed similar to multi-versioned 
       database.
    2. Parallelize ORAM
    3. Abort entire epchs in case of failure
- Guarantees that adversary cannot learn:
  1. Decision(commit/abort) of ongoing-transaction
  2. Number of operations in ongoing-transaction
  3. Type of requests issued to server
  4. Actual data accessed
- Uses Ring ORM (type of Tree-based ORAM)
    1. const stash size
    2. fully deterministic eviction phase
      $Z+S$ slots in cloud
      $Z$ is reserved for actual encrypted data
      $S$ is reserved for dummy data
      Random permutation for location of dummy slots
- Client storage
  - constant stash temp buffers objects simple cache
  - set of current permutations each bucket that are accessed and marked invalid
  - position map recording the random leaf or path
      associated with data object
  - Two core invariants:
    - Each data to random leaf after every access
      (*path invariant*)
    - Physical location of $Z+S$ are randomly
      permuted (*bucket invariant*)
- Access Phase:
 Procedure for write and read are identical
  1. check the path to access from position map
  2. Read one obj from each bucket along that path
  3. valid dummy object from that bucket using local
     permutation map.
  4. remap data to diff path (updated if write)
  5. flushed later (i.e after reaching epoch)
- Limitations:
  1. Scalability and fault-tolerance when depending on a local centralized proxy
  2. No Range or complex SQL queries

## GDPR and Storage systems
GDPR defines four roles and the data flow between the roles.
- This paper analyses the implementation from 2 popular open-source 
  databases with different use-cases and a commercial database to
  provide a general benchmark for testing future GDPR systems.
- Performance slow down upto 2-5 times the traditional workload
- GDPR compliance leads to metadata explosion
- Entities:
  - Customer
  - Controller
  - Processor
  - Regulator
- Data:
  - Personal and metadata store
    - Purpose
    - Time to live
    - Objections
    - Audit trail
    - Origin and sharing
    - Automated decision-making
    - Associated person
  - Non-GDPR and derived data
- Queries:
  - Create Record
  - Read-Data-by-{Key|Purpose|user|object|decision}
  - Delete-Data-by-{Key|Purpose|user|object|decision}
  - Update-Data-by-key
  - Update-MetaData-by-{key|purpose|user}

- Limitations
Benchmark has sub-optimal performance as it achieves GDPR compliance based on developer
recommendation.

## Differential Privacy
- Add random noise to the results from the data to protect individuals using 
a probabilistic distribution
- Privacy is violated by statistical database with any non-trivial utility 
- Incase results cannot be randomized with a noise, we use an 
exponential mechanism.Ex: Auctions. 


# Open Questions and Future Work
## Obladi
- Scale independant of proxy
- Leverage existing database logic for processing complex queries
## GDPR and Storage systems
- Provide most optimal approach for achieving GDPR compliance
- Examples of implementations in other storage systems
## Differential Privacy
- Using quantum computing for solving private distributed learning tasks[7]
# References
1. https://privacylaw.proskauer.com/2009/12/articles/invasion-of-privacy/netflix-sued-for-largest-voluntary-privacy-breach-to-date/
2. https://www.theverge.com/2020/2/4/21122044/google-photos-privacy-breach-takeout-data-video-strangers
3. https://gdpr-info.eu/
4. https://www.meity.gov.in/data-protection-framework
5. https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa
6. https://www.gdprbench.org/benchmark
7. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2103.08403.pdf
